1. Villager Experience will be replaced by a "Hierarchy of Needs" system (think: Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs). Similar to Tektopia, Villagers will have several stats that they track: Health, Hunger, Fatigue, Education, and Happiness. In order to advance a villager from level 1 to 2, they must have their Hunger need fulfilled for some amount of time. Then to get from 2 to 3, their Fatigue AND Hunger must be filled for some amount of time. Then from 3 to 4 they must be employed, and their Fatigue, Hunger, and Education must all be fulfilled for some amount of time. Then finally from 4 to 5, their Fatigue, Hunger, Education, and Happiness must all be fulfilled for some time!
2. Villager AI will be dramatically improved. Rather than just wandering around near their workstation, and going to sleep at night, they will get up, seek breakfast, go to work for part of the day, seek more food and companionship in the evening, and then go to sleep. They will have inventories, and be able to seek out things they need to do their jobs from some common storage, or can place completed products in that common storage.
3. Villager trades will be replaced with villager Requests. You can commission an item for a villager to make, and they will then try to make it using the resources in the village. If those resources don't exist, they won't be able to make it for you!
4. Some kind of request system will be in place. When a villager needs a tool and cannot find it in the village stores, they will add a request.  Players will somehow interact with that request system too.
5. Complete a task: get emeralds, Need a thing: spend emeralds. If the thing isn't there: spend emeralds to request it be made? Something like that.